Peter: First I would like to know who you are. Could you introduce yourselves? And what you do exactly for ownCloud, how you started, both in the community and at the company?


Frank: I started to think about it roughly 6 years ago, that there should be something like ownCloud, and I also came up with the name. I developed version 1.0 and published it online as open source. And since then the community grew. By now this is a nice community with several hunderd people that work on ownCloud. There is also a company now that offers ownCloud for businesses, when you have a little more requirements for the software, not just a .tar file, a community, mailing list, then you can go to the company and buy a professional enterprise product with support and everything related to it. I co-founded this company.


Jan: I am Jan, I am mainly a designer at ownCloud. I discovered it in 2011, as I was looking for an open alternative to Dropbox and such things. I found out that the first hackathon is in Stuttgart, where I studied at that time. We were around 4, 5 people, and this is how it started. Since end of 2012 I work full time for the ownCloud company and do the design.


Frank: Jan is our design and UX lead, and is responsible for the frontend, how the UI looks now. This is a very important, very central position, as ownCloud is not supposed to be a "hacker tool", but a tool for "normal" users, without special knowledge.


Peter: What is the main problem that ownCloud solves, from your perspective?


Jan: First, obviously, it's an alternative to those proprietary solutions, but it is also a tool that is easy to use, that provides file synchronisation on your own server, under your own terms, in an simple way. The installation is as simple as possible, maybe even simpler than Wordpress. Of course you have to set the file permissions correctly, but at a hoster, like IndieHosters, someone takes care of that for you. And in principle the registration is as easy as at Dropbox and similar services.


Peter: What are some of your short and long term goals for ownCloud? What do you plan next, and what are your visions for the future? Can you tell us something about that?


Frank: Yes, sure. First, the vision, as Jan just described, is to have a tool that is powerful on the one hand and provides all the functionality, that the user needs, but combined with an interface that is as easy-to-use as possible. That is the main goal, and that will not change. But this is something that won't be done quickly. We will still spend a lot of time on this goal. Make it simpler, but also more powerful. Besides that we will soon pulbish version 9.0, which will be released 6 weeks from now. With this version we will improve the stability and user-friendliness, also for admins. Regarding user-friendliness we are not only talking about users, but also about admins. To upgrade ownCloud was sometimes not as smooth as we wanted it to be. And version 9.0 will improve that. And there are things in the frontend, like comments, tagging and federation, where we take the next step in terms of functionality. If you ask about the long term goals: ownCloud is an open source project, i.e. we have now around 900 developers that contribute to ownCloud. And "contribute" means that you can send a pull request; you want to develop something, then you do it and it becomes a feature. Which means the long term goals are in the hand of the users, or in the hand of the developers community. Everyone who wants to contribute is invited to do it.


Jan: In addition there are ownCloud apps. Besides the fact that it is a file sharing and synchronization tool, there are many apps, like contacts, calendar, notes and a news app, for all possible use cases. And if something does not exist yet maybe someone is currently working on it. There are many things going on, for example some people are working on a chat application that uses WebRTC and XMPP for video and voice chat. Different things, that are done completely by the community.


Peter: We as IndieHosters have the goal to re-decentralise the Internet. So that there are more individual sites and not all data is stored in central instances. You already talked about it, but how do you see the role of ownCloud within the re-decentralisation?


Frank: Great question, that is somehow our mission, too. The first step was, obviously, to go away from central services that only exist once globally, like there is only one Google, one Dropbox, one Facebook, and to enable the users to host the software where they want. Which means you can host it at home, you can go to a hoster, like IndieHosters, you can host it at the university, or at a company, or whereever. And that is the first step. But it is also about federation, not only about decentralisation, because then you end up with a lot of islands, which does not help anybody. The islands have to be connected. And that is what we want to do with the federation feature. That you can connect them, that they work together, as if it was one big server, but in reality there is no central server.


Peter: Yes, I tried this, it works well with files, but does this work with calendars, contacts and such things?


Frank: Files are now the first step, but we want to extend this into other areas. Jan talked about it, one application that gets more popular is the one for chat and WebRTC. Chat based on XMPP, which is decentralised already. And then there is the ownCloud mail app, to orgnanise your mails. Mail is decentralised already, too. We try to do more here. Calendars and contacts probably in the future, too.


Jan: And what is important here is that the user may use those features first within ownCloud, but then also with other software. Like yesterday you, Frank, talked to Pydio, and the people of Cozy Cloud set next to them. This way things develop further, and that is the cool thing about federation, that not only one system, like ownCloud, can talk other instances, but completely different people that use other systems. This is the power of open source, because different people use different systems, because they say: hey, this system does it like this, this system does it like that, but they can still communicate with each other.


Peter: Are there currently any steps towards this, for example with Cozy Cloud?


Frank: The federation feature, which allows you and me to share a folder, even if we are not on the same server, this feature we developed within ownCloud, it is working really well in version 9. But we designed the API so that others can use it, we documented it during the summer and try to establish it as a standard. Just yesterday we had a meeting with some people from Pydio and Cozy Cloud, and they want to implement it. I think that is a great step, to reach decentralised, federated interoperability. The area should not be dominated by a single player, otherwise you have a fix point like Google again.


Peter: The web is now 25% Wordpress, how many peta bytes are hosted on ownClouds?


Frank: That is not measureable. We can look at our number of downloads, are there any trends. Recently we calculated a bit and came to the conclusion that there are around 8 million users. But this is an estimation.


Peter: It's decentralised...


Jan: You never know how many people use one installation.


Frank: We do not have any central user database like others.


Peter: With ownCloud it is possible, for example, to synchronise your data with a mobile phone. Do you work on any solutions specifically for mobile devices, to integrate ownCloud?


Frank: Yes sure, for files as our core there are apps from ownCloud, to integrate it on Android and iOS. In addition there is the web interface that works well on mobile devices in the latest version. We rely on open standards, as far as possible, which means WebDAV that works with different devices. For example, I use a small app on my mobile phone for notes, that is able to synchronize files with WebDAV. In this case they go to ownCloud.


Jan: For calendars and contacts we use CalDAV and CardDAV. On Android you need an additonal app for this, DAVdroid, and there are others. But DAVdroid is open source. iOS does support CalDAV and CardDAV natively, you can just add your account. Then there are mobile applications for the ownCloud notes app, or for the news app, for example, as a replacement for Google Reader. They cache the data for offline usage.


Peter: But you do not develop applications for calendars or contacts, for example for Android?


Jan: No, we rely on the native apps. They synchronize the data.


Frank: I think if we planned to build our own calendar application that would be too much for us. We support open protocols and there are already calendars that use those. The same is true for music, for example. A very popular app is the music app. After you synchronized your music collection with ownCloud, the music app scans the music files, analyses ID3 tags, downloads covers. It contains an API that is Apache compatible, which allows you to access the music from the outside. Then there are clients on mobile phones that are Apache compatible. You can connect those to the server and stream your music from anywhere. This is another example, where we do not necessarily need to develop our own player. But if you use open standards, somebody will do it.


Peter: Our idea is to create register buttons for free software web applications, in a decentralised way. On Dropbox, for example, you visit their page, click on "Register", enter your mail address and password and instantly get your account and use it. How could something like that look for ownCloud or for other free software web applications? Do you have any plans or ideas around this?


Jan: On the ownCloud site we have a provider page, where we list ownCloud providers, where you can register as a provider. We also had the idea to reduce the list in a certain way, to simplify the choice. Often people ask me which provider I recommend. This is difficult because there is no "owncloud.com" for registrations. I think Diaspora did it, or they still do it, with a register button and then you are redirected to a random instance. Or pump.io did it like this. This is a bit, I don't know...


Peter: A bit strange for your personal data...


Jan, Frank: Exactly.


Jan: I prefer to give personal recommendations. Depending on the person: is the person able to host her own server, or prefers a provider? Or wants to install it on a Raspberry Pi? There are many approaches at the moment. There are so many metrics to rank providers. It is very difficult to categorize this. It would be interesting to talk to you about that...


Peter: Well, we had the idea of a "migration network", where you can...


Frank: ... that you can migrate your data freely ...


Peter: Exactly, that the user can register for ownCloud, pays for a year, but he can change the hoster at any time, by clicking a button. Or move to a home server, if he installed ownCloud on a Raspberry Pi, so that he can put his data from the Internet on his Raspberry with one click.


Jan: Exactly, this is also possible with ownCloud, simply because of the fact that we use open formats and protocols, you can export and import. Here one can dock into.


Peter: What is your favorite plugin or feature of ownCloud? What do you use the most?


Jan: I personally use the mail app a lot, because I am working on it. It is an IMAP client. I just find it interesting, because often you hear: ah, mail is so complex, there are only few good mail apps. I am a bit disappointed with existing open source solutions, to be honest. And that's why I find it interesting to work on something better. Also because it is an interesting example for the integration with other apps. For example, if you write a mail and enter the recipient you will get autocompletion from your contacts. From your files you can simply add attachments, or store attachments from mails on the net. This app is highly integrated. Avatars are loaded from the contacts, and your own data. I use it a lot.


Frank: Now I had some time to think about it, but... On the one hand you asked what I use most often, but on the other hand what is my favorite feature. Mostly I use not very exciting things, like synchronise folders, create a publicly shared link, send it to someone and the recipient can then look at it. Which is wonderful for photos, for example. You can synchronize photos to a specific folder with the mobile phone app, generate a link, send it to your family: look, my vacation photos! They click on it, see a beautiful gallery, can click on the images, watch them in large. That is maybe not very exciting, but I find it very handy. If you also ask what is a bit fancier or more intersting: there is an app that I personally find very good, because I like the idea a lot. It is an app that you can install and then enter the data of your mail server. Then the app fetches all attachments that arrived with your mails, and puts it in a folder that you synchronise to your desktop or mobile. You get a folder on your desktop with all the attachments that you ever received. I think this is a very creative idea, I have never seen something like that before.


Peter: I have to have a look at this... and the last question is: what would be the question that you would like to be asked from us? And your answer, please!


Jan: Actually those were really good question already!


Frank: One challenge, you asked about it, is: how can someone use ownCloud that is not able or does not want to run a server. The bright answer is: she has to go to a hoster, like you. I would really like to discuss with you more about this, how to make the experience smoother. Maybe you can get an account somewhere from the desktop application. We will display, as mentioned, the best X hosters. Then you can register directly. I did not have a look at Dropbox for a while, but aren't you able to create an account there directly from the desktop application...?


Jan: Yes...


Frank: Eactly! Something like this we could develop for example with you. Directly from the application or from the mobile phone, you download the ownCloud app from the app store on Anroid or iOS, click on "Register" and then appears: you can register at those 20 providers, maybe with prices and feature, and then I say: this one looks good! Click! Then I register directly with you and the data is stored in the app. I would really like to brainstorm with you, what great thing we can build here.


Peter: Sounds good!


Jan: Another thing came to my mind, too! The question on how to participate at ownCloud.


Frank: Haha, very good!


Jan: We are an open source project and I would say we have a very cool community. Our code is on github for collaboration. There is a "core" repository and the ones for all the apps, for example "calendar", "contacts", etc. We also have regular Meetups every month, for example in Munich and Berlin. And each year we have a conference in Berlin for contributors, in September this year. It is always amazing to work with so many people. And for everyone that wants to participate in development we have a "junior job" tag in our issue tracker. Those are small "starter problems" to solve, or even new features. Or whatever you want to develop, it is a platform and everybody can develop apps, whatever you want. Like such a small email attachment app, that is very useful in general.


Peter: Thanks a lot for the interview!
